# Grace Hopper Conference

## 2010 Keynote - Duy Loan le (Zee Lon Le)
Collobartion across the bounadires

TI - 2002 elected Senior Fellow - joining only four men worldwide in 80 year history

"All my life, in my work, in my community, and even my family I'm sruronded
men - and you get tire dlooking at them"

"8 years later I remain the first and only one.  Let me make it clear it does
me know good to be the first and the last.  So when I was elected I gave
myself 15 years to work on the second senior fellow (female).  One way or
another we are going to have another female senior fellow at TI even if it
kills me in the process"

"Just like IBM, Intel Senior Fellow is the counterpart of senior VP on the
mangemenet track.  Carrying that title you assume that my job is technology
based 100% - well that might be true but I can guaratenne you that 90% of my
problems have nothing to do with technology - it has to do with people"

First - In order to succeed in life we must collobrate with others but the
first person we must collobarate with is ourselves.  And the first boundary we
muts cross over is the personal limitation that life sometimes brings us

Second - We live in a world where technology is pervaise but successful
collobration still requires relationship building and relationship building is
less science and more art

Third - Tehcnology has brought many of us together but I will submit to you
that 100 years from now the world will still be very far apatr when it comes
to pepole's way of life and their personal biases and preferences

## Personal boundaries

"On apr 22nd 1975 I kissed my father for the last time not knowing whether I would
ever see him again.  I left my country because we had los tit to the enemies.
I left everything I had worked on or for since the age of six.  I set foot
in America only to find I had become both dumb and deaf because I can't
understand and canot speak the languag.e  We gave up everything for a chance
of freedom... The basic freedom that every human being deserves but only those
fortunate enough can enjoy as our right at brith wheras peopl ein other
countries have to fight for with their courage and often with their lives."

"I dreamed of being the best student possible.  During the day I cooked
cleaned for an entire family of nine.  I tutored and babysat my younger
brothers, sisters and nephew.  At nnight at studied by translating each word
from English to Vietnamaes.  With that draem and hard work four years later at
my high school graduation I step up not to receive my high school diplomo but
to deliver the valedictorian speech at 16"

"That same yar I broke the golden Asian rule - I moved away from my family -
to study engineering in another city; an unmarried daughter is expected to
live with her parents"

"I started my first professional job at TI as a memory designer - bought my
first car in America, bought my mum her first house in america, bought my own
first house in america, got engaged, got married - all within six months - it
was a lot fo a kid of 19 turning 20"

"In life we have to collobrate with people to succeeed, but the first person
we must collobrate with is ourselves, adn the first boundary we must cross
over is the personal limitation that life brings us or sometimes we self
impose"

"When I talk about collobrating withourselves and breaking our own personal
limitation I'm talking about the iwllingness to assess our inner potential and
the courage to let it rise and shine.  The clarity to not let the situation
that we are in cloud our vision to see beyond the present impossibility.  I'm
talking about the confidence and the faith in our own dreams - chase them
accomplish them and do good with that.  The widom as we go through life to not
only believe in ourselves but even more important to believe in others"

"I worry about the younger workforce and the scale of importance of
relaainoship building in their mind and their know how of how to go about
doing it"

## Japan

"I made my first tirp to Japan in 1985.  A quarerter of a centruy ago Japan
was a very different country and if you see htem they are either cleaning the
restroom or serving tea to the men.  So you can imagine the shock on the faces
of 30 Japanese engineers when I walk into the room and introduce myself as the
senior engineer who just came over to train them"
