# a16z

# Making Sense of Big Data, Machine Learning, and Deep Learning

Christopher Nguyen - Adatao Sonal Chokshi

* "The 3 V's (volume, variety, velocity) - that definition is functionally
  correct but focusses on the problems of Big Data - the challenges you have
to deal with when you deal with big data, but it misses the question of why
you do you want to deal with this data.  The reason for big data is machine
learning."

* "Peter Norvig, research at Google, Big Data is not just quantitatively
  different, it's qualitatively different."
* "Not how much data do you have but how much data is enough to learn from?"
* "Google have learned to take advantage of big data to take a lot of
  decisions"

* "We tend not to want to have problems unless their is a greater benefit to
  that cost.  The benefit of big data is because we can unleash algorithms at
them, and these algorithms can automatically detect patterns."

"Wisdom - you have the rules, but you know when the rules don't apply because
you've seen 3, 4, 5 corner cases before.  Somehow, "intuitively" you find in
this situation the rule doesn't apply, but what we think of as intuition you
can think of as parameters inside a machine learning model."

"BI - sometimes we are captured by what we said in the past.  What was
available was to look backward - aggregations - "How much revenue did we make
yesterday from this region.

BI going forward the ability to apply machine learning to big data.  With
enough data from all of that experiences we can build a model from that and
project into the future.  Not just look at past questions but also future
questions - predict the unknowns from the knowns."

"Top down view, bottom up view.

Bottom up view - that's how technology develops. We always build things from the bottom up and then realise there's a pattern a look
top down again.

From the bottom up view Hadoop is mainly primarily a storage layer.  The
distinction between this and other file systems - it's highly parallel
(resiliency) and it's capable of running on commodity hardware.

For the first time people can afford to buy terabytes of storage and only pay
a little for it.

Economy of hardware, Companies showing that there is value in taking all this
data and making decisions from it, Open Source

Spark - If you start from the storage layer - storing is not enough

- Bottom layer - Storage - Big Data
- Middle layer - Compute - Big Compute - e.g. MapReduce

In any computing stack you need more than just storage.

"Hadoop MapReduce - take all the data, do some computation, put it back

Unfortunately MapReduce is not designed originally to handle queries.

"MapReduce was designed to be slow.  MapReduce as implemented at Google by
Jeff Dean and Sanjay Gamawat back in the early 2000's.  The MapReduce engine
was intended to do one particular job - crawl and index the web.

Google's approach was to parallelise it over 1000's of machines.  When you have
1000's of commodity machines doing a task that may last half a day, the
probability of one of those machines going down approaches one.

When a machine goes down the question comes up "Do we start the job over".
It's designed in a way that if a single machine goes down, another machine can
pick up where it started.

Spark takes a different approach.  Spark's goal is to be able to do a lot of
the queries very fast.

Fast is competitiveness - you get there before I do and you win.

When you can do something in "real time" you will change your workflow.

If the user can't get something done in 5 seconds they won't ever do it.

So far our industry has not built the bridge from the above to the human
user.

Big Apps on top of Big Compute on top of Big Data

Q. We went from 500ms to 100ms - what happens when we get to zero?
A. Why stop at zero?"

Machines are helping you make decisions - competitive edge."

# a16z Podcast: For Google, Android is a Tactic and Cloud is a Strategy 

http://a16z.com/2015/05/29/a16z-podcast-for-google-android-is-a-tactic-and-cloud-is-a-strategy/

# Truth and Humanity in Leadership

Lars

# Disruption in Business and Life
Marc Andreessen and Clayton Christensen

* The big companies that get disrupted are well run.  They are very focussed
  on current customers and current customer needs.  Something new comes up
from below.
* What causes disruption to occur is not incompetence - "you do everything
  right"
* Tech companies can get disrupted very quickly.  Most good startups have a 5
  year window before they get locked into a pattern of doing business with a
particular type of customer.
* 2016 - $50bn going into tech, $1tr going from US S&P 500 back to
  shareholders (20 times more coming out big established companies).
  - What happens to the $950bn?
  - Globally there is more money in debt than in equity.  $6tn bonds that are
    returning negative yields (have to pay to own them).  "I think the
critical crisis in the economy at large is not the unicorns are overvalued,
but there are not enough.  Big companies are not being aggressive enough at
investing for the future.  Capital is abundant, opportunity is scarce.
We have more than 100 companies valued at over a billion"
* "The non consumption - nobody has made it so affordable and accessible than
  even more people have access to it.  How many people can go to the Harvard
Business School?  There is so much non-consumption about how to manage"  
  - "We narrow our potential if we think about consumption as opposed to
    non-consumption
* No one has a strategy to go out and get divorced or grow kids that hate
  their guts, but a shocking number of people go and implement that strategy.
* When we have a spare half hour or ounce of energy, we invest it in our
  careers.  "What can I do with this time that will produce the most immediate
and tangible evidence that I've achieved something?"
* When we go home it's very hard to see achievement.  Our kids misbehave, the
  house gets messy.  Unconsciously we invest our time and energy where we get
immediate return.
* "I am not on this earth to make the partners of BCG richer.  I really want to
  become a good husband and a good father.  If I spend my Saturday's at BCG
I'm going to be implementing a strategy I don't intend to pursue."
* "Life is an unending stream of extenuating circumstances."
* It's easier to hold to our principles 100% of the time than 98%.

# Data Network Effects 2016/03/08

Vijay Pande (Biotech) and Alex Rampell (Finance) (a16z)

* Data Network Effect - Network effect that results from data
  - Network effect - The value to participants as more users use it e.g. ebay
    - more buyers = more sellers = more buyers
* DNE - typically no commerce - you are either reading or writing (data)
* As more people write, the value of each read goes up.  e.g. credit score
* Often talk about "winner take all" markets (or winner takes "most")
* Medical side - combine with data science and machine learning.  Modern
  methods like deep learning crave data.  Have to reach a critical mass before
they can be used
* Sometimes people conflate having a lot of data with a DNE.  You have to have
  a plan to actually do something with the data e.g. provide something higher
quality e.g. healthcare diagnostics, or something cheaper - the combination of
higher quality and lower quality is the game changer
* There's no network effect to typical exhaust type data e.g. Visa.  A lot of
  data takes form of an exhaust, but there is no network effect.  As opposed
to when data is a key component of the business model - more people want to
read because more want to write, more want to write because more want to read
* Doesn't have to be fancy machine learning - just the ability to monetise
* Algorithms tend to get better by small increments (1%).  If you are an
  algorithm company it is hard to build value.  You need to pair the algorithm
with the data.
* DNE tends to be more valuable than the algorithm
* Be careful about hiring loads of data scientists before you have enough
  data!
* How do people get enough data?  Sell something at cost or low margin e.g. 23
  and me - get kits, out gather huge data sets and make big research deals.
Google didn't set out to become a deep learning company.
* Some people value time more than more, some people value money more than
  time.  Some people value privacy more than money, some people value money more than
  privacy.
* DNE can happen by accident, but it's better to have a plan
* Best data science is when people can go deep within the domain.  It's not
  just taking off the shelf algorithms.

