# Fearless Change
Linda Rising & Mary Lynn Manns

## Ask for Help

*Since the task of introducing a new idea into an organization is a big job,
look for people and resources to help your efforts.  The job of introducing a
new idea into an organization is too big for one person."*

* The single biggest failing of many change agents is that they do not look
  for help.  They believe they can do it themselves, or they feel they can't
ask for help because this would reveal their own inadequacies.  Yet the
likelihood of success is directly related to their ability to ask others for
help.

* Most people are more likely to help when they are asked.  Most people want
  to be connected, invited, and involved.  Most people will have energy and
commitment if they are given the opportunity to be players and to influence an
initiative's outcome.

*Ask as many people as you can for help when you need it.  Don't try to do it
alone.*

Get the help, advice, and resources of people who care about you and/or the
things you care about.

If a person is hesitant to agree to your request for help turn it around.
Explain how this opportunity can be an advantage to them, such as allowing
them to learn something new, make new contacts, or even add a line to his
end-of-year report.

* Don't become discouraged if the help is slow in coming.

## Big Jolt

*To provide more visibility for the change effort, invite a high profile person into your organization to talk about the new idea.*

Some people might be too busy to attend *your* presentation, but they will
take time to hear an expert in the field.  When a speaker has credibility,
people are influenced by what they have to say.

If funding is not available, entice the expert by pointing out that his visit
is an opportunity for publicity for his latest project or book.

Personally invite and remind people.

Schedule a pre-event meeting so the speaker can tailor his talk to the needs
of the company.

Encourage him to use *Just Enough* to speak at the level the organization can
absorb.

When advertising and introducing the speaker, highlight his experiences that
relate to the innovation.

Get permission to videotape the presentation for people who can't hear the
speaker live.

Make sure you have people who can help you after the speaker has gone.
Without appropriate follow-up, the enthusiasm is likely to fizzle.  Make sure
this event is held in the context of a larger plan.

## Official Skeptic

"Astronomer Carl Sagan said that we need a balance between two conflicting
needs - the most skeptical scrutiny of all ideas that are served up to us and a
great openness to new ideas.  If you are only skeptical, then you never learn
anything new.  You become a crotchety old person convinced that nonsense is
ruling the world.  (There is, of course, much data to support you).  On the
other hand, if you are open to the point of gullibility and have not an ounce
of skeptical sense in you, then you cannot distinguish useful ideas from the
worthless ones."

* Ask for help from strong opinion leaders, who are skeptical of your new
  idea, to play the role of "official skeptic."  Use their comments to improve
your effort, even if you don't change their minds.

Skeptics who are "gurus" and "connectors" may stifle your efforts unless your
change their minds, limit their impact or ask them to help you.

You may not be able to change their minds but if they are offered a role in
the initiative they could change from a skeptical outsider to an insider who
could make a positive contribution.

* "Ask for help from a skeptical opinion leader to play the role of "official
  skeptic" or "official realist"

## Fear Less

*Any innovation is disruptive, so resistance is likely"*

Every change agent complains about resistance, but if you think this is bad,
consider the alternative.  It's frightening to imagine a situation with no
resistance at all.

* In her book Soul in the Computer, Barbara Waugh says "I force myself to ask
  of every obstacle, 'What if this is a gift?  What is it that this obstacle
or setback is telling me?'  Someone who is initially the most skeptical may
become my best partner, constantly detecting the hype and fluff and
unnecessary complexity in my thinking about what we are doing and what the
next steps are"

* The first step in dealing with opposition is to appreciate it.  Get it out
  in the open, rather than let it fester in the dark.

* No course of action is perfect.  Skeptics present gifts; they provide us
  with information about the route we've chosen and how to alter our approach
and our goals.

* Fears typically  manifest themselves as resistance.  You reaction is likely
  to advocate your views harder.  That too is motivated by fear: the fear of
looking bad when everyone is watching, the fear that your ideas may, in fact,
be wrong.

* Resistance is not the primary reason why changes fail.  It's the reaction to
  resistance that creates problems.

* It's hard to listen to people when we don't agree with them.  Usually we
  just elaborate our point of view or repeat what we've said.  A better
approach is to encourage the other person to say more about his point of view.
Some times just hearing what another has to say will help both of you reach a
better understanding.

* *Ask for help from resistors.* Listen, really listen, to what a skeptic has
  to say and learn from him.  Try to appreciate the differences in opinion.
When people disagree with you, stop and think about the value in seeing things
from their perspective.  Rather than hiding the potential problems, ask for
input on ways to address them, and then seek to understand.

* Be sure the skeptic knows you are listening.  Acknowledge and validate his
  expertise.  Ask questions.  Try to understand his arguments.

* Include his objections as limitations and topics to consider when you do
  presentations or lead discussions on the new idea.

* It's a natural human tendency to shy away from criticism., but it an be a
  sign of a healthy, vital culture when people care enough to air their
concerns.

* Find something to appreciate in all those who aren't on your wavelength.
  Appreciation can be an antidote to fear.

* The way you operate toward them will elicit the personality you see - the
  resistor you fear or the best person someone is capable of being.

* The skeptics must be willing to talk and to listen - if they are not, put
  your energy elsewhere.

* Other people who see you dealing respectfully with resistors, and even
  raising objections in advance, are likely to be impressed with you as the
messenger of a new idea.

* Resistors can overwhelm you if you are not prepared to handle criticism.
  Encourage them to talk with you one-on-one to protect yourself from a verbal
attack in public that can end up damaging your cause.

