# Dynamic programming

Recursion + Memomisation
"Smart recursion"

Relies on three properties

* Optimal substructure - the optimal overall solution contains within it
  optimal solutiosn to sub-problems - the classic example is shortest paths
* Overlapping subproblems - sub-problems are revisited many times

Can be done top-down or bottom-up

* Careful bruteforce
* Turn an exponential algorithm into a polynomial one
* Often optimisation problems - minimise or maximise something

## Greedy versus DP

Greedy algorithms almost never work.  Greedy is that a locally optimal choice
leads to a globally optimal solution.  Often a greedy approach will appear
correct superficially - need to proove it.  Dijkstra is an example of a greedy
algorithm

## DP

Define the solution in words

Relate solution to sub-problem

Determine the number of subproblems and the cost per sub-problem

Determine the number of choices (careful brute force)


Solve the overall problem

## Test justification

### Define the solution in words

Split a given text over multiple lines such that the overall badness is
minimised.  Badness is the amount of whitespace remaining on a line after the
splitting - defined as the desired width minus the length of the line cubed. 

The recursive solution is defined in terms of Where to split the first line?
- there are 'n' choices for where to split the first line.  Where to split the
  first line is answered by the one that results in the minimum total badness

    min (badness(0,i) + min_badness(i, j) for i in 0..j)

### arrays and slices

words = ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e']
len(words) = 5
words[0] = 'a'
words[4] = 'e'
words[5] = out of bounds
words[0:100] = ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e']
words[0:len(words)] = ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e']
words[0:1] = ['a']
words[1:le(words)] = ['b', 'c', 'd', 'e']

### Recursion tree

words = ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e']

                                    0,5

         1,5          2,5          3,5          4,5          5,5 

  2,5 3,5 4,5 5,5   3,5 4,5 5,5    4,5 5,5      5,5

  3,5 4,5 5,5   4,5 5,5   5,5    5,5

### Confusions

* The number of subproblems doesn't seem to be 'n' to me - do they mean the
number of *distinct* subproblems?

* How does this relate to the power set?  I initially thought that it was the
  same but writing it out longhand it doesn't look like it.  Oh - I think I
know where I went wrong I latched on to a student saying "all partitions of
the set of words" and wrongly understand that as "the power set of words"

In terms of all-partitions - there must be factorial or is it triangle number?  There are 5 ways to partition the first, 4 ways the next and so on.  Looking at it from another way, for each new element there are two ways to configure it - either it is in the same partition or it is in a new partition - in that sense there are 2^n partitions of a set - argh!


    
    a         => 1
    ab  a,b   => 2
    abc ab,c a,bc a,b,c => 4
    abcd abc,d ab,cd ab,c,d a,bcd a,bc,d a,b,cd a,b,c,d => 8

    (2^n)/2?

    For each additional element, it is either a member of the partition to the
right of it, or it starts a new partition.  However it is not 2^n because half
the cases would have no partition to the right.

Well at least someone on the internet agrees -> https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/2058045/ordered-partitions-of-an-ordered-list

  Note: I forgot that (2^n)/2 simplifies to 2^(n-1)

In which case I say that there are exponential sub-problems and therefore even
DP can only run in exponential time


    
    
