# Dynamic programming
Friday, 05 January 2018

* Careful bruteforce
* Recursion + memoisation
* Turn an exponential time algorithm into a polynomial time one
* Optimal substructure - the optimal solution to the global problem contains within it
  optimal solutions to sub-problems
  - shortest paths is an example of optimal sub-structure
* Exploiting overlapping sub-problems

* Greedy approach almost never works - don't use a greedy approach without
  proof that it is correct - Dijkstra is an example of a
  greedy algorithm

1. Define the problem in english
2. Define a sub-problem that is a similar structure to the global problem
2. Define a solution in terms of solutions to sub-problems
How many choices do you have?
3. Solve the sub-problems
4. Combine them to form the global solution

XXXSE I am confused between general optimal sub-structure and DP

Often DP is about minimisation or maximisation

DP can be bottom up or top down.  For bottom up it needs to solve the
sub-problems in the correct order - need to know the sub-problem DAG

Text justification

Split text into lines to fit a given pagewidth so as to minimise the overall "badness"
of the lines.  Badness is defined as the cube of amount of whitespace left to
the right of the words on a line.

min(badness(all possible ways to split the text))

We can define this problem recursively

Base case (single word?)

badness(w)

Recursive step

min(badness(text[0:i] + min_badness(text[i:len(text)+1])) for i in range (0,
len(text))

Number of sub-problems

How many choices do you have?

n = number of words in text

There are n-1 choices of where to split the first line.  There are n-2 choices
of where to split the second line (since the first line must be at least one
word).

Number of ways to split the text = sum of(i-1) from 0-n

XXXSE I find the sigma difficult

    a -> a -> 1 choice
    a b -> (ab) (a b) 2 choice
    a b c -> (abc) (ab c) (a bc) (a b c)

2^(n-1)

XXXSE I forgot that 2^0=1 so thought the first one didn't fit the pattern

Happier, more motivated, less despairing, feel like I have learnt something :)
:)

So the number of ways of splitting the text is exponential in the number of words.  Since each of the words is
unique I don't understand how we can calculate the min without calculate the
badness of each sub-problem at least once.

Am I getting confused between sub-problems and badness.  Is badness a
sub-problem?  No badness should be thought of as a black box - it is used in
calculating the min for a sub-problem but it is not *the* sub-problem.

A sub-problem is the minimum badness for a suffix of words.  What is a little
uniunituitive is that we need to know the minimum badness for each possible
suffix to calculate the minimum badness of the next problem.

Naively, for each sub-problem (a way to split the text) we have to calculate the badness of 'n' words.

No - a way to split the text isn't a sub-problem - that's a set of
sub-problems.

                    a b c d - 8 ways to split (2^3)
    (abcd)  (abc,d)   (ab,cd)   (ab,c,d)   (a,bcd)  (a,bc,d) (a,b,cd) (a,b,c,d)

  Need to call badness 2^n-1 times

    a b c

    min(a + min(b,c))

These are all the sub-problems.

The sub-problem graph is the way that to solve one problem, you need the
solutions to other problems - it is the way they depend on each other - think
Fibonacci - you can't calculate n until you have n-1 and n-2.

I can see that adding one more word (n+1) could be as simple as the min of the
new word and the min of all the sub-sequent words - in that case we are
reusing.  But then there are all the sub-problems where n is part of the next
sequence.

The problem is to calculate the min badness over all the possible ways you can
split the text.  A sub-problem is the min-badness of a smaller text.  I don't
know that the problem has optimal sub-structure in that the optimal global
solution doesn't contain within it the optimal solution to sub-problems - not
in the way that shortest paths do.  Well I suppose it contains min badness for
each line, but not for any arbitrary sub-list of words.  It contains optimial
solutions to each of the lines within it (i.e. each line that forms part of
the global solution is itself a optimial configuration of those words.  It
doesn't contain the optimal configuratio nof any arbitrary subset of words.

This is the same as shortest path.  A shortest path from A->C that goes via B
contains within it the shortest path from A->B and B->C it doesn't contain any
arbitrary shortest path e.g. from B->D.

For a given configuration of text

  01000000

How many sub-problems are there? 2^(n-1)

How many overlapping sub-problems are there?

  11000000  1 - the case where the new word is on it's own
  and then all the cases where it is part of the suffix
  10

The part that I got really confused about is how the magic works.  How is it
correct in this instsance?

It seems like the only way to solve min_badness for n words is to evaluate the
badness for each possible split of n words (which is exponential in n).

I don't "feel it in my bones" that it is correct to do it without this.  I am
distrustrful of recursive solutions.  I think this is a combination of 

i) Unfamiliarity
ii) Not being able to step though them in my head

Now, it should be possible to re-write the recusrive word wrap bottom-up.

I have this fixation on representing a candidate solution as a binary string

    1000010010
    ^    ^  ^
Each 1 is a place to begin a new line.  From this representation we can easily
see that there 2^(n-1) possible ways to split the text into lines.  How can we
use this representation to create a bottom up solution
   
   abcd
      1   d                  min(d)
     10   c2
     11   c1 reuse min(d)    min(cd)
    100   b3
    101   b2 reuse min(d)   
    110   b1 reuse min(cd)   min(bcd)
    111   nothing to do
   1000   a4
   1001   a3 reuse min(d)
   1010   a2 reuse min(cd)
   1011   a1 reuse min(bcd)  min(abcd)
   1100   nothing to do


So in order to calculate min bottom up we need to work backwards through the
text?

DP = {}

for i in range(len(text), 0, -1):
  for j in range(len(text), i, -1):
    
I think the idea is correct but I need to develop the code in a structured
way, not just trial and error.

Can you write it in words?

The min badness from position i is the min of trying all the choices for the
length of the first line starting from i

The min badness of the last word is the badness of that word

The outer loop needs to work backwards through the text.

The inner loop can work either forwards or backwards

Aha loops need an invariant
Loops have a pre-condition and a post-condition
